---
title: 'Bytesize 37: Gather Town'
subtitle: James A. Fellows Yates - Leibniz-HKI / MPI-EVA
type: talk
start_date: '2022-03-15'
start_time: '13:00 CET'
end_date: '2022-03-15'
end_time: '13:30 CET'
youtube_embed: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nRY1_FvL7Pk
location_url:
  - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nRY1_FvL7Pk
  - https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.19923416.v1
---

# nf-core/bytesize

Join us for our **weekly series** of short talks: **“nf-core/bytesize”**.

Just **15 minutes** + questions, we will be focussing on topics about using and developing nf-core pipelines as well as other general topics related to nf-core.
These will be recorded and made available at <https://nf-co.re>
It is our hope that these talks / videos will build an archive of training material that can complement our documentation. Got an idea for a talk? Let us know on the [`#bytesize`](https://nfcore.slack.com/channels/bytesize) Slack channel!

## Bytesize 37: Gather Town

This week, James Fellows Yates ([@jfy133](http://github.com/jfy133/)) will present: _**Gather Town**_

This is the platform that we have used for recent online events, and that we will use again for the upcoming hackathon.

He'll do a full walk through of how to sign up, and, well - walk through the event!

<details markdown="1"><summary>Video transcription</summary>
**Note: The content has been edited for reader-friendliness**

[0:01](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nRY1_FvL7Pk&t=1)
(host) Hey, everyone. Thank you for joining us for yet another bytesize talk. I'd like to begin by thanking the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative for funding all of the events. Some little reminders, as always, the bytesize will be recorded and uploaded on our YouTube channel as well as shared on Slack. So, feel free to find it later on those platforms. And feel free to also ask questions at the end of the bytesize talk using our chat platform on Zoom or unmuting and posing questions. The talk will be roughly around 15 minutes followed by a live demo. Feel free to ask questions after or during the presentation talk. Today, we'll be having James Fellows, who is an informatician at the Mark's Black Institute in Leipzig, who will be taking us through Gather Town, which is a video calling space that allows you to hold multiple conversations in parallel. And this is in line with the hackathon that we're going to have this week. So, over to you, James.

[0:01](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nRY1_FvL7Pk&t=1)
Thanks very much. I will be talking today about Gather Town, which is what we're going to be using for the hackathon, which starts tomorrow. You can check all the information details on the nf-core website, nf-core events. And I'll be introducing today the platform we'll be using, giving you a quick run-through of how you can get set up and then how to use it most effectively and particularly for our event. As Simeon just said, Gather Town is basically a piece of web conferencing software, a bit like Zoom, but with a twist, because it allows you to actually be in a space with a little avatar, walk around, interact with people in a much more natural way, much more like in real life, just staring at everyone's faces.

[0:01](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nRY1_FvL7Pk&t=1)
We found in the past that that has worked really, really nicely for actually making these online conferences much more fun. And so, this is a screenshot of exactly what it looks like. You can see in the bottom right-hand corner, there's my my video screen, just as you was on Zoom, but also there's a second version of me, a mini me, at the top here. And this is how we will be, basically, the space which we'll be exploring in a bit in the live demo part. So, to join the nf-core Gather Town, we've, for security reasons, we've put a password protection on there. So, if you want to join, firstly, go to the nf-core Slack, so you can join this by the nf-core link on the slide. Then you have to go to the Gather Town channel, and then just say hi, and then someone will basically press a little button, which will allow you to receive privately a link to the workspace and also the password to access it, such as this. And so, something very important to say is that if you use the space, because you can also use the space outside of the hackathon, so you can use it for any nf-core-related meetings or next row meetings you may have, that's completely okay. But if you're going to use a space for yourself and any other guests you may bring along with you, make sure that they adhere to the code of conduct, which you can also access on the website or on the link that you get in the message from the Gather Town workflow. So, once you've got the password and the link, you can go to the link, and this is the first thing you'll see if it's the first time you've joined. So, you enter the password, as it asks, and then you can create your little avatar. So, you can basically pick different clothes, different accessories, different colors, so on and so on, very much like Pokemon or Zelda or something like that games nowadays. Then you can make your name. We ask generally please put your full name here, not your shortened name or nickname, because it makes it harder for when we've got 60 to 100 people in the same workspace to find them. So, if you put your full name, that'd be really helpful. Then you'll get to this page, which basically you have to give permission to your browser, if you've not used this before, to actually allow Gather Town to access your microphone and camera. So, normally if you're on Chrome, you should get like a button like this, and you press allow and it should go straight forward, and then you can test here, and it will tell you if you see. So, you should be able to see yourself, and when you're talking, you should see this green bar here going up and down. In some cases, we have some experiences for OSX users that you have to grab additional browser permissions, but you have to go into the OSX system settings flat under the privacy section to allow that. But often people recommend try using the desktop app instead, that often runs much better and much smoother. So, that is available. Go to the Gather Town website to get that. So, once you've completed giving permission to everything, you'll be then now will be sent to a onboarding platform, if this is the first time you've used Gather Town before, and basically give you a little tutorial on how everything works. So, just follow the instructions or skip if you think you remember your Pokemon days. And then once you've completed the tutorial, you should then arrive in the nf-core office space, which should look something like this. And so, now I'm going to give a live demo, and hopefully it won't crash as often these things do, of what this looks like and how to use everything. So, of course Zoom is covering the button. Here we go. So, I'll turn off my video here in Slack, no not Slack, in Zoom. There you go. So, sorry if I'm not looking at the camera here, but it's on my other window. So, this is the nf-core office, as you can see by the nice logo at the top. And you can walk around with your arrow keys. So, you should also be able to see this with the arrows on my screen. And this is how you can basically move around. And when you arrive, this general space is the nf-core office. However, we have a bigger space for, there's Maxime at the top, a bigger space for the hackathon. So, to go there, you can go into this door to the right. We'll have an arrow to indicate that next time. And this is the main nf-core lobby. So, if you ever have any questions about the event or anything like that, you can go up the information board here. And for any interactive object in Gather Town, you can press X to load this. So, in this case, this should open the nf-core hackathon webpage. And you can see basically all the information there. And so, now we'll show you why you have this nice interaction thing, why it's a bit more natural. So, with Maxime, as you can see at the moment, you can't see Maxime's video. You can't hear him or anything because we're too far away. But as we're close to each other, you should start seeing him to start appearing. And you can see him. And if he keeps talking and saying something, and I walk away, you can't hear him now. So, if he keeps talking as I come closer again, as we don't want to hear that. So, this makes it a very nice way to actually have conversations, move between groups, join conversations as necessary. This is really nice. Then for the hackathon, you can see we have different rooms. We have the classroom on the left, Group 1 and Lecture Hall. So, I'll go into one of these as an example. And you can see here that we have our first classroom. So, this will be for people who are completely new to NextFlow and completely new to nf-core. And it's a space to do self-learning together, follow tutorials that exist already either by Sakura or nf-core. And you can go step by step together and do this group learning exercise there. Another nice thing is that in most rooms, we have these whiteboards, which if you go up and press X, it should load something like this. And this is a cross-collaborative whiteboarding software which Graviton offers. So, you can write things here, but you can also, collaborative write things, but also draw pictures and images, draw diagrams if you need to help each other work out what's going on. And these should save and be persistent between usage. There you go. So, you can see on the left, we've got a graffiti artist going on there. So, we'll leave that. So, then that's where the classroom is specifically for people who are completely new and want to just get started with NextFlow or nf-core. But for the main topic of the hackathon, we will have four different groups and each different group will be assigned to one of these rooms. If we go here, you can see it's basically the same thing. It's a bigger space, we can have more people, but you still have the whiteboards as normal. Now, the nice thing about the tables is if we go into the tables, what you should basically find is that anyone sitting around the table can hear each other, but when you're moving away, well, that's not working here, I need to check that, but basically everyone sitting around the table will be isolated with themselves. So, people standing away from the table will not be able to hear the conversations in the board. So, that means you can also have everybody still in the workspace working on their own things, we can have teams and staff who are not interfering with each other, which is a really nice feature. So, I can maybe show you that back in the lobby if Maxime comes with me. Or, okay, this should work, I'm not sure if it's working here, but theoretically it'll work. I think we just forgot to put some private spaces in the room. I'll do that later. Yeah, good. So, then in addition to the classrooms or group rooms, our main room for all the check-ins, check-outs, talks, presentations is here is the lecture theatre. So, you can see at the top here, there's Matthias already there giving us a dance recital, very kind of him, and Maxime as well. And so, the important thing about here is that anyone standing on those orange dots by the pedestals basically are projecting to the whole room. So, you can see that Matthias, for example, has this little orange icon on Maxime as well, saying that he, everybody in that room can hear him. So, this overrides this proximity communication bit. But also on the right hand side, we have the second, and so the, sorry, the one on the main platform is for the speakers. Then if you ever have any questions, you can go and line up over here, exactly, nice queue. And then whoever's standing on this orange bit will basically be also projected the room. So, if you have any questions during the talk, you can come up here to ask your questions. Now, the final room we can go into is then where we can have all the social activities, and this is here in the MFcore cafe. So, here's a good example of the private space around all the tables. So, we'll make sure this is everywhere. Anyone not in this square of the green square there cannot hear us. But if Maxime then comes in, now he comes in. So, he can now join the conversation. And so, you have these private conversations as you want. So, other things about the user interface, there is also text chat if necessary. You can see this here. If you ever need to refer to the code of conduct, that's at the top here. You can change between different ways of chatting with people, either private chat to everybody in the entire space, like the entire world, and also any people in your close proximity. And another thing you can do is let's say you are lost. There's a little mini map down here, which can tell you where you are, and it'll point out where anybody else is. So, particularly in bigger spaces, if you can't find someone, you can look here. You can also search for people or follow people if necessary. So, let's say, you know, I want to meet Matthias, I can press follow here. And automatically, my little avatar will go and walk towards him in the most fast route possible, and then we can run. And also, I can keep following him if he wants to lead me somewhere. So, if you're a bit too nervous and get stuck or lost, you can just follow people and that speeds things up as well. If at any point you get stuck, you can also, let's say, I come here, I can't walk through Matthias, but if I need to walk through Matthias because it's too big of a crowd, if I hold down G, I can then walk through the person. I turn them into a ghost, so G for ghost, and you can get through them. So, if you ever get stuck, that normally will help you with this. If you ever need to screen share, to share your screen, you can also press this button down here. And this is a typical Chrome method of sharing screen, as you should be familiar with. This would be slightly different depending on which browser you're using, but generally it's pretty easy. Otherwise, I guess the last thing is if you want to learn how to dance, if you hold down Z, then you can dance. And with that, if you ever want to exit Gather Town, all you simply have to do is close the tab and you're finished. Then if you basically load the link again, what you should find, it should load you back in the same place. You may have to log in if you don't save your cookies, as normal. So, if I take a moment. There we go. And we're back in the same place. So, just as a reminder, if you have any problems or you need access, or rather about the event, go to the NFL websites, go to events, hack them much when you do, and all of the information should be in here. So, otherwise, that's me done. Are there any questions? Looks like there are no questions yet. Normally, the best way is just to try it out yourself and shout on Slack if you have any problems. I think everyone is saying it was pretty much clear. Yeah, I guess that being said, I'm looking forward to see everyone during the hackathon starting tomorrow. And also, as James has said, if you have any problem with Gather Town, feel free to shout it out on Slack and someone will respond to you definitely. Okay, see you guys tomorrow. Bye.

</details>
